---
layout: post
title: "philanthropy and bourgeois morality"
author: "Thomas Rees"
categories: essay
tags: [ethics]
image: drought-mud-dry-africa.jpg
---

## introduction_

As a leading figure in the Effective Altruism movement, Peter Singer is famous for asserting that we have a moral duty to provide aid to those suffering of famine globally by donating money to philanthropic organisations (1972). I will argue that Singer is unable to infer a general moral principle that would give us a duty to provide aid from a particular case. Instead, I will give a positive Hegelian account of morality and argue for the necessity of a material, systemic analysis of the causes of famine.

## a thought experiment_

In ‘Famine, Affluence and Morality’, Singer conceives of the famous ‘Drowning Child’ thought experiment wherein he imagines walking past a shallow pond and observing a child drowning in the water. Rescuing the child would pose no threat to his wellbeing besides spoiling his clothes and so Singer argues that he morally ought to. By most theories of ethics, aside from some forms of moral nihilism, this statement is uncontroversial: spoiling his clothes is morally insignificant compared to the death of a child. From this case, Singer then infers the general moral principle that, to paraphrase, ‘if we can prevent something very bad from happening without sacrificing something of comparable moral significance then we are obligated to.’ As will become relevant to my argument, I think ‘Drowning Child’ is best read as an attempt to appeal to the reader’s moral intuitions, to circumvent the need for justifying the general moral principle with a particular ethical theory. Otherwise, Singer could have argued directly to his principle without deference to ‘Drowning Child’.

## philanthropy_

If we agree with his inference, then the implications of this principle are radical. Singer argues that, when applied to famines across the globe, we are shown to have a moral obligation to donate our money to philanthropic organisations up to the point of marginal utility. I will refer to this case as ‘Famine.’ Like ‘Drowning Child’, we can agree that the death and suffering caused by famine is very bad. So, with the proliferation of philanthropic organisations such as Oxfam and UNICEF that facilitate our prevention of these outcome by donating money that would otherwise be spent on morally insignificant luxuries, we are found to be obligated to do so. This conclusion radically undermines the traditional categorisation of philanthropy as supererogatory. Here, I will not object to Singer’s reasoning from the general moral principle to the philanthropic obligation which I find to be convincing but instead will contend with his inference of the general moral principle from ‘Drowning Child’.

## the fallacy_

Singer anticipates two objections to this inference in his work, the first of which is immediacy. This objection argues that there is a disanalogy between ‘Drowning Child’ and ‘Famine’ because in the case of ‘Drowning Child’ the suffering is immediate which gives us a reason for why we ought to save the child. Singer replies that considerations of immediacy merely explain whether we shall help the child but does not provide us with a reason for why we ought to help them. Indeed, immediacy may have once been morally relevant but, in an age of globalisation in which we can now learn of famine on the other side of the globe via instant communication technology and provide aid through international institutions, it is no longer.

However, if we introduce William’s ‘internal reasons thesis’ (1979) we can observe a sleight of hand at play in Singer’s inference. We define the ‘internal reasons thesis’ here to be that all genuine reasons for an agent to act are internal rather than external. In other words, genuine reasons to act are necessarily connected to our motives – we cannot adopt Sidgwick’s (1871) ‘point of view of the universe’. In the case of ‘Drowning Child’, our reasons for thinking that we have a moral duty to help the child are specific to that context. Since Singer here appeals to our moral intuitions, our reasons here are necessarily internal and connected to something we subjectively are motivated by. By attempting to infer a general principle from this case Singer is claiming that whatever our reasons for thinking that we should help the child are sufficient to hold the general moral principle. But he is wrong to do so since our reasons are internal so context specific and may indeed include historically or socially contingent reasons such as immediacy. When Singer rebukes the objection, he gives external reasons ‘from the point of the view of the universe’ and so applying William’s ‘internal reasons thesis’ shows he cannot give a genuine reason for an agent to not be motivated by reasons like immediacy. This is not to say that if we already hold the general moral principle that it should not be applied to both ‘Drowning Child’ and ‘Famine’ but that we cannot infer the general moral principles for all agents from a particular instance. 

## an alternative conception of morality_

The naturalistic description of morality I have articulated thus far is, as Williams has defended using the ‘Internal Reasons Thesis’, Hegelian insofar as our moral intuitions in the cases of ‘Drowning Child’ and ‘Famine’ are derived from shared ethical norms that are socially and historically contingent. To Hegel these norms taken together constitute our ‘ethical life’ (1820). In ‘The Fallacy of Philanthropy’, Gomberg (2002) takes Singer’s work on international aid to be symptomatic of our shared ‘ethical life’. He argues that the general moral principle established by Singer is non-utilitarian. There are no qualifications of the long-term consequences made for saving the child in ‘Drowning Child.’ To Singer it is not relevant the causes that put the child in the pond or the long-term consequences of rescuing them. A poignant story from history can be used to illustrate this. In 1894, a four-year-old boy in Passau, Bavaria was rescued from a river. That boy may have been Adolf Hitler (Hall, 2019) and yet it seems the man who rescued him was obligated to do so regardless – we do not qualify what kind of person the child may become. Gomberg contrasts the non-utilitarian logic of ‘Drowning Child’ with the utilitarian logic of ‘Famine.’ When considering ‘practical’ objections to ‘Famine’, Singer addresses Malthusian (1798) concerns about overpopulation. He argues that philanthropy may have to be accompanied with population control policies but does so by appealing to utilitarianism. The consequences of ‘Famine’ are relevant in a way they are not for ‘Drowning Child.’ 

According to Gomberg, this discrepancy can be accounted for by examining our particular ‘ethical life.’ To Hegel, ‘ethical life’ arises naturalistically throughout history as a web of ethical expectations shared by a society. We internalise these learned norms from which our ethical duties arise; duties of care to family, friends and the dead; duties not to kill or steal property. We expect to be condemned if we violate these duties and these expectations bind society together. As such we recognise a duty in the ‘Drowning Child’ case specifically because of its immediacy and exceptionality. To allow the child to drown would be in violation of our shared expectations. Singer may object that one can appreciate the Hegelian interpretation whilst still holding that we are nonetheless bound by deeper moral duties in accordance with some moral principle. But as I have argued, we cannot infer this moral principle from our moral intuitions in the ‘Drowning Child’ case since they are moulded by reasons internalised from our ‘ethical life.’ Instead, they must be derived from an ethical theory such as utilitarianism. However, in doing so one would have to provide external reasons, and so applying William’s ‘internal reasons thesis’ once again this would be fallacious. This explains why we feel intuitively that utilitarianism produces the wrong outcome in thought experiments such as Driver’s (2007) ‘Sheriff’ example. One should note that the ‘internal reasons thesis’ does not preclude a Kantian (1785) account of morality although I shall not engage with this here since it is not a position held by Singer.

## social ills _vs_ emergencies

In contrast, ‘Famine’ can be characterised by its ubiquity and perpetuality. As such we can characterise ‘Drowning Child’ as an emergency and ‘Famine’ as a social ill since an emergency elicits different societal expectations regarding how we should act compared to a social ill. That we feel obliged to act in ‘Drowning Child’ and not ‘Famine’ is indicative that our ‘ethical life’ can address emergencies but not social ills since, by their ubiquity and perpetuality, we are not expected individually to act to prevent them. To address ‘Famine’ then we cannot rely on reasoning from our moral intuitions as Singer attempts. Instead, we must engage with the material causes of ‘Famine’ through critical economic and political analyses. Presently, the political-economic status quo is capitalism and so Gomberg is correct to analyse the tendencies within capital to cause ‘Famine’: land privatisation, prioritisation of ‘cash crops’, formation of agro-conglomerates and labour redundancy.

## ideology

We can go further by asking why we do not intuit a moral duty in ‘Famine.’ In ‘The German Ideology’, Marx and Engels (1932) argue that in societies in which there are classes with differing relations to the means of production, the dominant ethical norms are those of the dominant class. Later, Gramsci (1971) articulated cultural hegemony as the mechanism by which this occurs. As such, by abstracting ‘Famine’ from capital, Peter Singer is a bourgeois philosopher. Here I mean that Singer conflates the private cost of ‘Drowning Child’ with the cost imposed on us by capital in ‘Famine’ which he takes to be a law imposed by nature. More concretely, capital produces a food surplus worldwide (Sundaram, 2016) and undemocratically allocates its distribution. Capital thus possesses the material resources to aid in ‘Famine’ but will not without market transaction - which sufferers are unable to afford precisely due to tendencies within capital itself as outlined by Gomberg. By framing charity as the only solution to ‘Famine’ then Singer is, in effect, reinforcing the status quo which perpetuates ‘Famine.’ A Nietzschean (1899) argument could be made that this amounts to Singer normalising a ‘slave morality’: we can use charity to help since it is ‘good’ whereas radical (‘evil’?) action is not an option worthy of consideration.

## conclusion

I have argued that we do not have a moral duty to provide aid as Singer suggests and indeed, if we accept the Hegelian account of morality, the question posed merely amounts to asking descriptively if such a duty is included within our ‘ethical life.’ To address social ills such as ‘Famine’ then, it is instead necessary to proceed from a systemic, material analysis of their causes and consider radical action to disrupt them.
 
## Bibliography:

* Driver, J. (2006) Ethics : the fundamentals. Malden, MA: Blackwell Pub (Fundamentals of philosophy, 1).
* Friedrich, H.G.W., Wood, A.W. and Nisbet, H.B. (1820) Elements of the philosophy of right. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
* Gramsci, A. and Buttigieg, J. A. (1971) Prison notebooks. New York: Columbia University Press (European perspectives).
* Gomberg, P. (2002) The fallacy of Philanthropy, Canadian journal of philosophy. JSTOR. Available at: https://www.academia.edu/1817777/The_fallacy_of_philanthropy (Accessed: March 21, 2023).
* Hall, A. (2019) Brief history of young Adolf Hitler’s rescue from a river aged 4, The Scotsman. Available at: https://www.scotsman.com/news/world/brief-history-young-adolf-hitlers-rescue-river-aged-4-1648530 (Accessed: March 21, 2023).
* Kant, I. and Wood, A. W. (1785) Groundwork for the metaphysics of morals. New Haven: Yale University Press. 
* Malthus, T.R. (1798) An essay on the principle of population. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Pr.
* Marx, K. and Engels, F. (1932) The German ideology. London: Electric Book Company. Available at: https://public.ebookcentral.proquest.com/choice/publicfullrecord.aspx?p=3008501 (Accessed: March 21, 2023).
* Nietzsche, F., Haussmann, W.A. and Gray, J. (1899) A genealogy of morals. London: T. Fisher Unwin.
* Sidgwick, H. (1871). The Methods of Ethics (Cambridge Library Collection - Philosophy). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9781139136617
* Singer, P. (1972). Famine, Affluence, and Morality. Philosophy & Public Affairs, 1(3), 229–243. http://www.jstor.org/stable/2265052
* Snow, M. (2015) Against charity, Jacobin. Available at: https://jacobin.com/2015/08/peter-singer-charity-effective-altruism/ (Accessed: March 21, 2023).
* Sundaram, J.K. (2016) The world produces enough food to feed everyone. so why do people go hungry?, World Economic Forum. Available at: https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2016/07/the-world-produces-enough-food-to-feed-everyone-so-why-do-people-go-hungry (Accessed: March 21, 2023).
* Williams, B. (1979) Bernard Williams, internal and external reasons, PhilPapers. Available at: https://philpapers.org/rec/WILIAE-2 (Accessed: March 21, 2023).
